



Network Working Group                                            S. Celi
Internet-Draft                                                Cloudflare
Intended status: Informational                              7 March 2021
Expires: 8 September 2021


                           Deniability in MLS
                   draft-celi-mls-deniability-latest

Abstract

   This document describes a mechanism to achieve weak deniability in
   MLS[I-D.ietf-mls-protocol-11] (MLS).  By revealing signature keys,
   participants beyond the conversation can forge transcripts of it,
   casting shadow on the authentication of all sent traffic.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/claucece/draft-celi-mls-deniability.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 September 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Terminology
   3.  Requirements Notation
   4.  Protocol Overview
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   DISCLAIMER: This is a work-in-progress draft and has not yet seen
   significant security analysis.  It should not be used as a basis for
   building production systems.

   Deniable authentication is a property by which it cannot be proven
   that a message has been authored by anyone in a conversation, as
   anyone could have potentially authored that message.  A protocol is
   deniable in regards to authentication if there is no valid evidence
   of its execution that can be used to proof authentication to a third
   party.

   It is proposed that deniability should be a property of secure
   messaging systems, as a common privacy goal.  MLS a system proposed
   to achieve security in a group chat setting, in which deniability can
   be put as an extension to it.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

4.  Protocol Overview

   MLS offers two forms of authentication for messages sent:

   *  Group members can verify a message originated from a member of the
      group they belong to.  This form of authentication is implicit.

      -  Encrypted messages: authentication is guaranteed as messages
         are encrypted with AEAD with a key derived from the group
         secrets.

      -  Plaintext messages: authentication is guaranteed by the use of
         a "membership_tag" which constitutes a MAC over the plaintet
         message with key derived from the group secrets.

   *  Group members can verify a message (plaintext or encrypted)
      originated from a particular member of the group.  This form of
      authentication is explicit.  This authentication is guaranteed by
      a digital signature on each message using the sender's public
      signature key.  This key is advertised on the Credential inside
      the KeyPackage object in the leaves of the tree.

   Additionally, MLS offers explicit authentication for:

   *  KeyPackages objects themselves by using the public signature key.
      The signature of a KeyPackage can also serve to attest which keys
      the group member introduced into the ratchet tree and to whom the
      corresponding secret keys were sent.

   *  PublicGroupState objects by using the public signature key for
      external commits.

   *  GroupInfo objects by using the public signature key.

   A weak form of deniability is preserved for implicit authentication,
   as there is only knowledge that someone from the group sent a
   message, but is is not possible to know who sent it from that group.
   All that can be proven is that someone with the needed keys sent the
   message.

   A notion of offline deniability can be achieved for explicit
   authentication if the private key corresponding to the advertised
   signature key from the KeyPackage object is revealed.  Anyone with
   access to that key, then, can create arbitrary messages with it, and
   no one can attest that a particular user as the author of the
   message.

   As deniability have to preserve authentication, the private key
   corresponding to the signature public key in use can only be revealed
   after messages are verified (and received).  In a group set setting
   is almost impossible (TODO: find reference) to know when a message
   has been received by all members of a group, and coordinate between
   each other when to reveal the key.  In order to solve this problem,
   we put the responsibility on the client: every time a client updates
   its KeyPackage, it should reveal the previous private signature key.
   Updating a KeyPackage can happen for different reasons:

   *  Update the signature key as there is fear of compromise

   *  Update the algorithm associated with the signature key

   *  Add an extension

   *  Change the protocol version

   *  It's validity period ended: this validity period can be configured
      per client, and for the deniability extension MUST not be more
      than one week.

   The application must signal the AS to generate new signature keys,
   reveal the old ones and use these new objects.

   The form of deniability given then can be similar to post-compromise
   security: deniability is healed after the keys are revealed, but for
   a time it can be compromised.

   In order to support this form of deniability the client MUST support
   the deniability extension on its KeyPackage object.

   This document defines the following MLS extension code point.

      enum {
        ...
        deniable_mls(34),
        (65535)
      } ExtensionType;

   TODO: should the extension should be valid per group?  TODO: give
   guidelines on timeframe TODO: where does the keys get published?  How
   will this mechanism will work?  TODO: the timeframe mechanism can be
   deniable themself, will this provide further proof for deniability?
   TODO: what happens when a client with the extension runs with another
   that do not suport the extension?  TODO: talk about updating keys and
   messages that arrive way later after the keys have been expired.

5.  Security Considerations

   It is worth noting that in order for this kind of deniability to
   work, signature keys MUST be defined per device that participates in
   a group, and signature keys cannot be shared between devices.

   It should be taken into account that, as MLS supports out-of-order
   delivery, some messages might arrive after the signature key has been
   revealed.  This mechanism weakens authentication in that regard, and
   for this reason, the time frame for revelation should be sufficiently
   big to handle most out-of-order cases but small enough to not hinder
   deniability.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the "deniable_mls" extension in the "MLS
   ExtensionType Values" registry.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [MLS]      Barnes, R., Beurdouche, B., Millican, J., Omara, E., Cohn-
              Gordon, K., and R. Robert, "The Messaging Layer Security
              (MLS) Protocol", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-mls-protocol-11, 22 December 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-mls-
              protocol-11.txt>.

Author's Address

   Sofía Celi
   Cloudflare
   Lisbon
   Portugal

   Email: cherenkov@riseup.net
